Synchronization (#77)
unikraft/docs: content/en/blog/2022-06-27-unikraft-synchronization.md

> The Unikraft v0.9.0 introduced the common SMP API, which created the need for
> synchronization primitives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Unikraft v0.9.0 introduced the common SMP API, which created the need for synchronization primitives.
```

> The project aims to add the SMP safe synchronization premitives as well as
> remove the race conditions in the kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project aims to add the SMP safe synchronization primitives as well as remove the race conditions in the kernel.
```

The project is the part of the GSOC'22.

> The project started with making the existing primitives in the Unikraft kernel
> (mutex, semaphore) SMP safe and adding new synchronization premitives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project started with making the existing primitives in the Unikraft kernel (mutex, semaphore) SMP safe and adding new synchronization primitives.
```

The new implementation is inspired by the FreeBSD code.

> The https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/pull/476 shows the current progress of the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[This PR](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft/pull/476) shows the current progress of the code.
```

We now briefly discuss each primitive in Unikraft.

> ## Spinlock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Spinlock

```

> The Unikraft has architecture-dependent spinlocks for both x86 and ARM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unikraft has architecture-dependent spinlocks for both x86 and ARM.
```

### x86 spinlock:

> The x86 spinlock uses the instruction ```cmpxchg```.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The x86 spinlock uses the instruction `cmpxchg`.
```

This instruction compares the value in AL, AX, EAX, or RAX register with the first operand.
If two values are equal then the second operand is loaded into the destination operand.
Otherwise, the destination operand is loaded into the AL, AX, EAX, or RAX register.
This instruction when used with the lock prefix executes atomically.

### ARM spinlock:

> ARM does not have the instruction cmpxchg instead, it supports exclusive access to the memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ARM does not have the `cmpxchg` instruction or equivalent.
Instead, it supports exclusive access to memory.
```

The ARMv6 architecture introduced Load Link and Store conditional instructions in the form of Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive synchronization primitives, ```LDREX``` and ```STREX```. The ```LDREX``` instruction loads the word from memory and initializes the monitor to track the exclusive memory accesses.
The ```STREX``` instruction performs the conditional store to the memory.
If the exclusive access permits this store then it returns the value 0 otherwise, it returns the value 1.

> ## Mutex

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Mutex

```

> Previously the mutex implemented in the Unikraft were only capable of synchronization on uniprocessors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously the mutex implemented in Unikraft was only capable of synchronization on single CPU (i.e. non-SMP) systems.
```

This was achieved by disabling the interrupts.
But this is not enough on the multiprocessor system as different threads running on the different logical CPUs may access the same data structure.

> To solve the synchronization problem we can use the spinlock which will protect the mutex structure or we can use the atomic operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve the synchronization problem we can use a spinlock to protect the mutex structure or we can use atomic operations.
```

The current implementation uses the atomic operation ```__atomic_compare_exchange_n(ptr, expected, new, memorder)``` provided by GNU compiler.
This instruction compares the *ptr* with the *expected*.
If both are equal then it assigns the new value to the *ptr* and returns the *new* value otherwise it returns the old value of the *ptr*.

> The Unikraft library provides a wrapper named ```ukarch_compare_exchange_sync()``` on top of this atomic

Reviewer: Which library? If no library, just say "Unikraft provides".

> The Unikraft library provides a wrapper named ```ukarch_compare_exchange_sync()``` on top of this atomic
> operation to simplify the use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Unikraft library provides a wrapper named `ukarch_compare_exchange_sync()` on top of this atomic operation to simplify the use.
```

> Here is the snippet of the mutex lock and unlock function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the snippet of the mutex `lock()` and `unlock()` functions, `uk_mutex_lock()` and `uk_mutex_unlock()`:
```

The lock count is maintained to support the recursive lock.

```C
uk_mutex_lock(uk_mutex *m)
{

	/* Initialize the variable */

	for (;;) {

		uk_waitq_wait_event(&m->wait, m->owner == NULL);

		if (ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&m->owner, 0, current) == current) {
			ukarch_inc(&(m->lock_count));
			break;
		}
	}
}

uk_mutex_unlock(uk_mutex *m)
{
	if (ukarch_sub_fetch(&(m->lock_count), 1) == 0) {
		m->owner = NULL;
		uk_waitq_wake_up(&m->wait);
	}
}
```

## Semaphore
Previously Semaphore was also disabling the interrupts for atomic operations.
But for multiprocessor synchronization, a spinlock is added in the semaphore to protect the count variable.
The following code snippet describes the semaphore down and up functions.

```C
uk_semaphore_down(uk_semahpore *s)
{
	for (;;) {
		uk_waitq_wait_event(&s->wait, s->count > 0);
		irqf = uk_spin_lock(&(s->sl));
		if (s->count > 0)
			break;
		uk_spin_unlock_irqf(&(s->sl), irqf);
	}
	--s->count;
	uk_spin_unlock(&(s->sl), irqf);
}

uk_semaphore_up(uk_semaphore *s)
{

	irqf = uk_spin_lock_irqf(&(s->sl));
	++s->count;
	uk_waitq_wake_up(&s->wait);
	uk_spin_unlock_irqf(&(s->sl), irqf);
}
```

## Reader-Writer

> The Reader writer lock allows multiple readers to simultaneously acquire the lock but only allows a single writer to acquire the lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reader-Writer locks allow multiple readers to simultaneously acquire the lock but only allows a single writer to acquire the lock.
```

This means that the new reader can acquire the lock if there are zero writers, Whereas the writer can acquire the lock only when there is no reader as well as a writer.
A simple implementation can be done by using the spinlock.
But to get better performance we have implemented it using the atomic operation ```__atomic_compare_exchange_n```.

> Before implementing the reader-writer lock we need to consider the following problems:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before implementing reader-writer locks we need to consider the following problems:
```

* Starvation of the writers due to readers.
* Lost Wake-up problem.

To solve the first problem, we give the higher priority to the writers i.e.  in the lock function when the reader tries to acquire the lock it first checks if there are any pending writers, if yes it sleeps in the queue.

> Also in unlock function for both reader and writer lock we first check if there are any pending writers if yes then we simply wake up the writers instead of the readers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, in `unlock()` function, both readers and writers first check if there are any pending writers.
If yes, they wake up the writers instead of the readers.
```

> To solve the Second problem we can use the sleep with the timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve the lost wake-up problem we can use a `sleep()` call with no timeout.
```

The reader-writer lock is implemented using six basic functions which are essentially ```uk_rwlock_rlock, uk_rwlock_runlock, uk_rwlock_wlock, uk_rwlock_wunlock, uk_rwlock_upgrade, uk_rwlock_downgrade```.
To implement these functions we need three flags which are
* UK_RWLOCK_READ : 1 if the lock is held by readers, 0 if the lock is held by writers
* UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS : 1 if readers are waiting for the lock, otherwise 0
* UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS : 1 if writers are waiting for the lock, otherwise 0

These flags form the lower three bits of the lock variable.
The remaining bits have different meaning based on UK_RWLOCK_READ flag.

> When this flag is 1 i.e. lock is held by reader then upper bits store the count of the readers holding this lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this flag is 1, i.e. lock is held by a reader, then the upper bits store the count of the readers holding this lock.
```

Otherwise when the lock is held by the writer these bits store the owner of the lock.
Now instead of using the struct thread pointer, we distinguish the owners of the lock by using the address of the bottom of the stack.

> Since each thread has a unique stack which aligned to page size we get lower 12 bits to store the flags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since each thread has a unique stack aligned to the page size, we use the lower 12 bits to store the flags.
```

Along with this, there are separate queues for pending readers and pending writers.

Now we describe each method

> ### Reader Lock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reader Lock

```

The reader checks if it can acquire the lock, i.e. there are no current or pending writers.

> if yes then it increments the readers' count, otherwise it sets the ```UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS``` flag and sleeps in the shared queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it can then it increments the readers' count.
Otherwise, it sets the `UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS` flag and waits in the shared queue.
```

```C
uk_rwlock_rlock(uk_rwlock *rwl)
{
	for(;;) {
		v = rwl->rwlock;
		if(_rw_can_read(v)) {
			setv = v + UK_RW_ONE_READER;
			if(ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&rwl->rwlock, v, setv) == setv) {
				break;
			}
			continue;
		}

		if(!(rwl->rwlock & UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS)) {
			ukarch_or(&rwl->rwlock, UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS);
		}

		uk_waitq_wait_event(&rwl->shared, _rw_can_read(rwl->rwlock));
	}
}
```

> ### Writer Lock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Writer Lock

```

> The writer checks if it can write the lock, i.e. the lock is not owned by the reader or the writer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The writer checks if it can get the lock for writing, i.e. the lock is not owned by a reader or a writer.
```

> If yes then it unsets the ```UK_RWLOCK_READ``` flag, otherwise it sets the ```UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS``` flag and sleeps in the exclusivequeue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it can, then it unsets the `UK_RWLOCK_READ` flag, otherwise it sets the `UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS` flag and waits in the exclusive queue.
```

```C
void uk_rwlock_wlock(struct uk_rwlock *rwl)
{
	for(;;) {

		v = rwl->rwlock;
		setv = stackbottom | (v & UK_RWLOCK_WAITERS);

		if(_rw_can_write(v)) {
			if(ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&rwl->rwlock, v, setv) == setv) {
				ukarch_inc(&(rwl->write_recurse));
				break;
			}
			continue;
		}

		ukarch_or(&rwl->rwlock, UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS);
		uk_waitq_wait_event(&rwl->exclusive, _rw_can_write(rwl->rwlock));
	}
}
```

> ### Reader Unlock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reader Unlock

```

The unlock function decrement the reader count.

> If the reader count is 0 then it tries to wake up writers, if there are no writers then it wakes up the pending readers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the reader count is 0 then it tries to wake up writers;
if there are no writers then it wakes up pending readers.
```

```C
void uk_rwlock_runlock(struct uk_rwlock *rwl)
{

	for(;;) {

		setv = (v - UK_RW_ONE_READER) & ~(UK_RWLOCK_WAITERS);

		if(UK_RW_READERS(setv) == 0 && (v & UK_RWLOCK_WAITERS)) {
			queue = &rwl->shared;
			if(v & UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS) {
				setv |= (v & UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS);
				queue = &rwl->exclusive;
			}
		}

		if(ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&rwl->rwlock, v, setv) == setv)
			break;

		v = rwl->rwlock;
	}
	uk_waitq_wake_up(queue);
	return;
}
```

> ### Writer Unlock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Writer Unlock

```

> The unlock function sets the ```UK_RWLOCK_READ``` flag and the read count to 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unlock function sets the `UK_RWLOCK_READ` flag and the read count to 0.
```

> then it tries to wakeup pending writers, if there are none then it wakes up the pending readers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then it tries to wake up pending writers;
if there are no pending writers then it wakes up the pending readers.
```

```C
void uk_rwlock_wunlock(struct uk_rwlock *rwl)
{
	for(;;) {

		setv = UK_RW_UNLOCK;

		if(v & UK_RWLOCK_WAITERS) {
			queue = &rwl->shared;
			if(v & UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS) {
				setv |= (v & UK_RWLOCK_READ_WAITERS);
				queue = &rwl->exclusive;
			}
		}

		if(ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&rwl->rwlock, v, setv) == setv)
			break;

		v = rwl->rwlock;
	}
	uk_waitq_wake_up(queue);
}
```

> ### Upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Upgrade

```

> The upgrade function upgrades the reader lock to the writer lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade function upgrades a reader thread to a writer thread.
```

It first checks if there is only one reader, which has to be the current thread.

> If yes then it sets the current thread as owner and change unsets the ```UK_RWLOCK_READ``` flag, otherwise it waits on the exclusive queue until all remaining readers release the lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If yes, then it sets the current thread as owner and unsets the `UK_RWLOCK_READ` flag.
Otherwise it waits on the exclusive queue until all remaining readers release the lock.
```

```C
void uk_rwlock_upgrade(struct uk_rwlock *rwl)
{
	for(;;) {

		setv = stackbottom | (v & UK_RWLOCK_WAITERS);
		v = rwl->rwlock;

		if(_rw_can_upgrade(v)) {
			if(ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&rwl->rwlock, v, setv) == setv) {
				ukarch_inc(&(rwl->write_recurse));
				break;
			}
			continue;
		}

		ukarch_or(&rwl->rwlock, UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS);
		uk_waitq_wait_event(&rwl->exclusive, _rw_can_write(rwl->rwlock));
	}
}
```

> ### Downgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Downgrade

```

> Downgrade function downgrades the writer to the reader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Downgrade function downgrades a writer to a reader.
```

> The function sets the ```UK_RWLOCK_READ``` flag and reader count to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function sets the `UK_RWLOCK_READ` flag and reader count to 1.
```

> After successfully setting this it wakes up all the pending readers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After successfully setting this it wakes up all pending readers.
```

```C
void uk_rwlock_downgrade(struct uk_rwlock *rwl)
{
	for(;;) {

		setv = (UK_RW_UNLOCK + UK_RW_ONE_READER) | (v & UK_RWLOCK_WRITE_WAITERS);

		if(ukarch_compare_exchange_sync(&rwl->rwlock, v, setv) == setv)
			break;

		v = rwl->rwlock;
	}
	uk_waitq_wake_up(&rwl->shared);
	return;
}
```

> ## Testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Testing

```

Currently Unikraft does not have SMP safe wait queue and scheduler.

> Hence the testing code does busy wait on the given condition when the ```uk_waitq_wait_event``` is called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence the testing code does busy waiting on a given condition when `uk_waitq_wait_event()` is called.
```

> ## Future Work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Future Work

```

> In future the we can add the support for adaptive locks which will do busy wait or sleep on the lock depending on the state of the thread holding the lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future we can add support for adaptive locks.
In adaptive locks, a thread will either do busy waiting or sleep on the lock depending on the state of the thread holding the lock.
```

	++s->count;
	uk_waitq_wake_up(&s->wait);
	uk_spin_unlock_irqf(&(s->sl), irqf);
}
```

## Reader-Writer
The Reader writer lock allows multiple readers to simultaneously acquire the
lock but only allows a single writer to acquire the lock. This means that the
new reader can acquire the lock if there are zero writers, Whereas the writer can
acquire the lock only when there is no reader as well as a writer. A simple
implementation can be done by using the spinlock. But to get better performance
we have implemented it using the atomic operation ```__atomic_compare_exchange_n```.

Before implementing the reader-writer lock we need to consider the following problems: 
* Starvation of the writers due to readers.
* Lost Wake-up problem.

To solve the first problem, we give the higher priority to the writers i.e.
in the lock function when the reader tries to acquire the lock it first checks if there
are any pending writers, if yes it sleeps in the queue. Also in unlock function
for both reader and writer lock we first check if there are any pending writers
if yes then we simply wake up the writers instead of the readers. To solve the
Second problem we can use the sleep with the timeout.

> The reader writer lock is implemented using six basic functions which are

Author: Hi @razvand, thanks for the suggestions.
I have made the necessary changes
